# Objects

## Lesson Objectives

_After this lesson, students will be able to:_

1. Explain the difference between arrays and objects
1. Store key-value pairs inside an object
1. Access values by key-name
1. Add Object Properties
1. Change Object Properties
1. Explain why we use an object instead of an array
1. Manipulate objects and arrays declared as `const`
1. List common errors made with objects
1. Use object properties with conditionals

## Explain the difference between arrays and objects

We have seen the following datatypes:

* String
* Number
* Boolean

Arrays are a **data structure**. We use them to organize our data: in the case of arrays, we can organize our data into a **sequential list** data structure.

* We can use arrays to store multiple pieces of data as a sequential list:

```javascript
const vehicle = ["blue", 4000, 1989];
```

* Each element has a corresponding index (or place), in sequence.

But with the array above, we don't know what the values mean. Does "blue" refer to the color of the vehicle or the interior?  Is it the model of the vehicle?

* An object is also a **data structure**, but we can use objects to store data with greater specificity.

* In JavaScript, **objects** are what we use to represent **key-value** pairs.

## Store key-value pairs inside an object

Key-value pair syntax:

```javascript
const car = {
	color: "blue",
	hp: 4000,
	year: 1989
}
```

* Unlike arrays, objects use _named keys_ rather than ordered indexes. Each piece of data is _bound_ to its key, rather than assigned an index. The data is not _sequential_.

* In Javascript, an object is a way to group many pairs of keys and values together

We can console.log the entire object:

```javascript
console.log(car);
```

## Access values by key-name

We can access the values stored in key using dot notation:

```javascript
console.log(car.color)
```

## DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ARRAYS AND OBJECTS

* Arrays are declared using the square brackets ` const arr = [];`
* Objects are declared using the curly braces `const obj = {}`

Objects contain _key-value pairs_. They are are the **properties** of the object

A **key** is like an **index** in an array, but it has

* a name
* it is unique

A key is really a string but we can omit the quotes.

A **value** is what a key _refers to_, and can be any datatype.

## Add Object Properties

You can easily add more properties to a previously declared object:

```javascript
const house = {
	doors: 9
}

console.log(house)
```

> => { doors: 9 }


Add properties to the `house` object by simply adding a key using dot notation and the value using an equals `=`. Our house has no windows. Let's add some in _without_ writing them straight into the object:

```javascript
house.windows = 30
```

When we do it this way, the `windows` key is added to the object.

```javascript
console.log(house);
```

> => { doors: 9, windows: 30 }

Add another property `hasGarden`:

```javascript
house.hasGarden = true;
```

## Change Object Properties

Changing the value of an existing key has the same syntax as creating a new key-value pair:



```javascript
house.windows = 40
```

## Explain why we use an object instead of an array

When designing your programs, it is up to you to **choose** how to model your data. We can represent real-life things with our datatypes, but it's a matter of choosing the appropriate datatypes.

If the thing you want to model is just a list, use an **array**.

If the thing want to model has properties, use an **object**.

Using what we know about datatypes so far, which datatype would we use to model:

1. The name of your cat
2. The age of your cat
3. Your cat's favorite things
4. Whether your cat can speak French
5. Whether your cat can solve a Rubik's cube
6. Your cat

## Manipulate objects and arrays declared as `const`

`const` only prevents you from reassigning a variable, it doesn't prevent you from adding or changing elements of arrays or properties of objects.

You can do this:

```javascript
const mogwai  = {}

mogwai.name = 'Gizmo'
```

Cannot do this:

```javascript
const mogwai = {}

mogwai = { name: 'Gizmo' }
```

## Unique Keys

It just makes sense that keys ought to be unique within an object. Values, however, can be whatever.

An object can not have more than one key with the same name. If it does, the value will default to the last key with the same name, and the prior properties will be excluded on creation.

```javascript
const borough = {
	name: "Brooklyn",
	name: "The Bronx"
}
```

```javascript
console.log(borough);

=> Object { name: "The Bronx" }
```

Conclusion: keys should be unique within an object. Values, however, are not unique.

## Use object properties with conditionals

You can use object properties with conditionals, loops, etc

```javascript
const shoppingCart = {
	coupon: 'buy more',
	itemCount: 4,
	freeShipping: true,
	cartTotal: 3489,
}
if (obj.coupon === "buy more") {
	console.log('ok, let\'s give you a discount');
}

for (let i = 0; i < obj.itemCount; i++) {
	console.log(i)
}
```

You can test to see if a property exists on an object:

```javascript
const shoppingCart = {
	coupon: 'buy more',
	itemCount: 4,
	freeShipping: true,
	cartTotal: 3489,
}

if (obj.cartTotal) {
	console.log('ok, this object has this property')
}

if (obj.discountAmount){
	console.log('ok, this object has this property')
} else {
	console.log('no go, no discount!')
}
```

This is because accessing a property that doesn't exist on an object gives you `undefined` which is treated as `false`.
