# Introduction to GA

## Learning Objectives

- Introduction to the classroom, instructors and roles
- Review expectations and the student handbook
- Communication tools


<hr>

## INTRO to ICEBREAKER!

Two truths and a lie (7 minutes) with Instructor Demo

<hr>

## Instructors

- Madeline O'Moore - Instructor Lead

- Magnardo (Nando) Tavarez - Instructor Lead / Instructional Associate

- Arthur Bernier, Jr. - Instructional Associate

- Bruno Leonardo DaSilva - Instructional Associate


## Roles

- Instructor Lead (IL) & Instructor 
  - Lesson Blocks
  - Code-alongs
  - Labs
  - Morning Exercises
  - Afternoon Code Reviews
  - Creating Homework

- Instructional Associate (IA)
  - One-On-One help during Office hours
  - Homework Feedback & Homework Grading
  - Project Feedback & Project Grading
  - Your best helper!

<hr>

## ICEBREAKER!

Two truths and a lie (7 minutes)

<hr>

## Setting up for Success

## Student Handbook

The [student handbook](../../../../../wiki/Student-Handbook) is always accessible on the [class wiki](../../../../../wiki) in our class Github Enterprise repository.


<hr>

## ICEBREAKER!
Two truths and a lie (7 minutes)

<hr>

# Communication

## Micro Feedback

This is a chance to let us know how you're feeling every day

- We love feedback at GA
- Micro Feedback will be given daily
- Use this opportunity to tell us how you're doing and how we can improve
- Comfort Zone, Learning Zone, Panic Zone


## Communication Tools

### Slack

#### 4 channels

- #seirfx-211-classroom
    - #seirfx-211-outcomes
    - #seirfx-211-partytime
    - #seirfx-211-techtalk


#### How To:

##### Communicate in one of the outrun channels:

	- @username
		- sends a notification to a specific user
	- @channel / @here
		- sends a notification to everyone / everyone currently online
    - DO NOT use these unless absolutely necessary (usually only instructors/ta's use this)

##### Communicate privately:

- Direct messages are one-on-one messages nobody else can see.
- In addition, you can make group direct messages to talk to multiple people at once, privately.

##### Other:

	- You can mute channels that you no longer need (Fundamentals)
	- You can adjust the sound / notifications of your messages

### Zoom

Our video conferencing tool!

- We use breakout rooms for group meetings
- Don't forget to mute!
- You can share your screen with us / anyone
- Grid for speaker view

<hr>

## ICEBREAKER!

Two truths and a lie (7 minutes)

<hr>

## Break

Stand up, walk around, get a snack
