# Tips and Tricks

Read through the following.  Write down five things that you learned from reading this.  Write down five things that you plan to change about yourself when taking this class.

- Don't be afraid to ask questions or let us know when you're stuck
	- Don't attempt to "catch up" on your own
		- You'll just fall further behind
	- Follow along with what is being screenshared
		- Notes are meant to be a reference for later the are not a step by step guide
	- All of this material is online.  You could teach all of it to yourself, but it's incredibly difficult.  You're here to have us around to answer your questions.  Make sure to utilize your instructors.
	- Traditional schooling teaches us if we don't understand something, it's our fault.  This is not the case.  It's because the teacher didn't explain something well.
		- If you don't understand something, there are others who feel the same way
- Intensity, intensity, intensity
	- Students will get together and code/cry over zoom
	- Students get so involved they forget to eat
	- One student was riding her bike, had someone open a car door in front of her, flipped over her bike and the door, got up, and continued biking to class
	- One student was involved in a car accident, hospitalized, discharged, and still made it to class on time
- Don't focus on getting the certificate, focus on learning as much as possible
	- School Credentials are not meaningful on their own
		- No one will bring you in for an interview because you went to a bootcamp
			- Bootcamps have not been around long enough to gain any clout
		- The education you gain is what GA gives you
			- In reality, most devs who interview you will go into the interview believing you're unqualified due to lack of experience
			- Your ability to problem solve on the spot and talk thoughtfully about your code is going to be what changes their minds
- Figure out what kind of learner you are
	- Each person learns differently
	- What might have worked for you in one class might not work here
	- Think about how you learn and be aware of what works/doesn't work
- Ways to avoid distraction
	- Change your voicemail to let people know you will not be able to respond immediately
	- Set auto reply to email to let people know you will not be able to respond immediately
	- Deactivate social media
	- Turn off your phone during class time and while doing homework
- Check your homework by figuring out ways to test your answers to see if they are correct.  Don't wait for feedback.
	- You should be able to answer the question "did I do it right?" on your own.
	- In the real world, you'll need to figure out how to test your code to see if it works.  You won't have someone to read your code and tell you if you did it right.
	- There is no "best" solution.  Ultimately, the only thing that matters is, "does it work?"
	- Code "quality" (how you write code) doesn't matter as a jr developer.  Only your ability to solve problems matters
- Try to create a relationship with all other students. You don't know when you'll need a second set of eyes. Sometimes bugs are really simple, and can be spotted by anyone.  It's like writing an essay where your eyes know what you're trying to say and don't see mistakes
- Finding a job has a lot to do with timing, what the employer needs vs what the student wants to do, and personality matches. Because of this, it's never that the best students get jobs first.  Rather, the group who get jobs first will contain a diverse set of students.  This group of students who get jobs first are often a way into a company for others, so be friends with everyone.  Someone you think would be unlikely to get a job could be one of the first ones to get one and could help you out.
- growth mindset vs fixed mindset
	- growth mindset
		- people who believe that ability can be learned are highly successful
	- fixed mindset
		- people believe that ability is something you're born with are not successful
	- focus on the learning process, not on the results of your current task
		- you'll succeed more and have more fun
	- different types of fixed mindsets.  Monitor your reactions for these feelings:
		- You’re Wrong I Rule: person is unable to accept that they did something wrong
		- You’re Right I Suck: any criticism immediately sends person into feeling like they're worthless
		- Blame it On The Rain: any mistake a person makes is explained away by circumstance.  The person believes this won't happen again, so there's no need to correct the issue
		- Optimist Without a Cause: criticism is not important, given everything else that went well
- Programming is like writing an essay in a language you don't know.  Know what you want to say and then research how to say it
	- Come up with the solution to a problem on your own and then research any syntax you might need in order to implement it.  Do not research the answer to the problem itself
- Help out everyone.  IAs are often chosen by those who help other students a lot during class
- Plagiarism (passing someone else's off as your own) will only result in you getting job that you're unqualified for and will get fired from
	- How do I know?
		- What is it?
			- copying another student's code
			- copying another student's code and altering it to look like yours
			- copying a solution to a homework question, lab, or project that you found online
			- copying a solution to a homework question, lab, or project that you found online and altering it to look like yours
		- What is it not?
			- finding syntax online that will help you build the solution that you came up with
			- asking another student to debug your code or help you work with your own solution.  Note, this is not "what did you get for question 1?"
		- How to stay safe
			- Come up with your own idea about how to solve the problem and find syntax online to help you create it
			- Do not try to find the answer to how to solve the problem online or get it from another student
			- If you use a chunk of code that is more than a few lines long, even if you alter it, cite it with a comment in your code.  Give either a link to the site or the student that gave it to you.  If what you're citing is the vast majoritiy of your solution, it's probably plagiarized
	- Your employers will quickly discover that you don't know what you say you know
	- If you feel you can't complete the work, come to your instructors and we can figure out a way for you to turn in something meaningful.  There is always a solution
	- You can usually receive a partial refund or continue in another course if withdrawing for family/external issues.  Not for plagiarism.  Come to us before doing anything extreme
	- Even if you succeed in making us believe you are responsible for plagiarized work, ultimately, when you graduate, you will have only a meaningless certificate and none of the knowledge to back it up
- Project weeks
	- community bonding time.  Help each other out
	- a chance to simulate the real world and see where you need improvement
		- this is where you'll get a lot of practice with researching and debugging
- Bringing up your mistakes during class often illuminates good points to talk about
	- it's very difficult as an instructor to come up with scenarios where a student will make a mistake, since everyone makes different kinds of mistakes
- Practice learning on your own
	- This will be your life when you start work
		- the chances that you'll be using the exact tech we teach you is slim even though we pick popular tech to teach
		- the concepts that we teach will be the same for your entire life
		- tech changes, concepts don't
	- We teach you to teach yourself and provide hints along the way
	- Most of development is coming across something you've never seen and figuring it out on your own
- Projects and grades are not as powerful as being able to explain code
	- No interviewer will be impressed by your projects or your grades.  That's because you're still just starting out as a developer
	- They will, however, be impressed if you can answer interview questions and talk thoughtfully about your code
	- The education and knowledge you gain from projects, homework, labs, etc is what will get you past an interview.  Not the actual work itself
- Don't compare yourself with other students. This is not school, where everyone comes in with roughly equivalent experience
	- There is plenty of work available for graduates at all levels, as long as you fully understand the work you present to employers
- Don't let problems/questions of any kind (programming or personal) fester. Bring them up immediately to an IA or an IL
- We only "open the doors" you have to walk through the door.  We guide you, but you'll have to do most of the work.
	- It's like bowling.  We're the bumpers, but you have the throw the ball
- Learning how to debug your own code and read documentation/articles/forums takes practice.  This is not really something that can be taught.  Make sure you struggle and read a lot on the internet on your own time.  Don't immediately ask for help
- Development is like creating a recipe, it's just a series of basic steps
- Learn what kind of mistakes you make
- Type things out, don't copy and paste.  Copy and pasting takes your mind off of what you're doing.
- There is a disconnect between knowing something at a conceptual level and being able to use it.  Make sure you can do both
	- Just because you can look at code and understand it, doesn't mean you can build something like it
	- It's like having the recipe for baking a really complex dessert.  Just because you have the steps, doesn't mean it won't burn
- We create increasing levels of independence: lecture (very hands on) -> lab -> homework -> project (very hands off)
	- This is to ease you into what it will be like in real life
- Your community of students is the best aspect of GA. They will help you with finding work and help you when you are stuck on a problem at work
	- Explaining something to someone else is the best way to fully understand something
	- Learners teaching learners is stressed in educational books
		- There will always be some kind of a disconnect between someone with more experience and someone with less experience.
			- This is especially pronounced here where three months later you're a completely different person
				- ILs, IAs, and TAs are great, but nothing beats talking with someone in the same position as you talk to you
- Share your bugs and mistakes
	- Prepares everyone for finding mistakes in other people's code
- Class restrictions like attendance might seem silly, but we're trying to produce people who can show up on time for a meeting. Soft skills.
	- I knew a great dev who worked at Spotify, but got fired because he couldn't be punctual
- Knowledge really settles in during project time
- Try to fail as much as possible now
	- It will prepare you for being calm while failing on job
		- Attitude is very important when working
			- Most companies will not tolerate someone who freaks out or gets nasty during times of stress
	- It will make you faster at finding your own faults
- We teach a lot of non-technical stuff too! (learning to learn, methodicalness, reading tech docs, debugging)
- Anyone can do this if you work hard enough!
