# React Lifting Up State

## Learning Objectives
 - Learn how to lift state up from a component

React's data flow is unidirectional and data flows down: Data moves from parent components down. A parent component has no idea about the state of it's child components.

As we were updating our state of our individual products, the state in the parent component did not change.

Let's say we would want to make a shopping cart, that when a user clicks on an item it is then added to a cart. We would need to move that information out of the `ProductList` and into a `ShoppingCart` component. There is no direct way to move this data from the `ProductList` to the `ShoppingComponent` - we have to move the data up into the shared parent component of `ProductList` and `ShoppingCart` and then dispatch the data to the ShoppingCart.

If this seems, a bit unwieldy, especially if you have a lot of state to manage, a lot of people would agree. Therefore there are solutions to help, for example, there are other libraries like `Redux` that help manage state.

For now, we'll learn the basics of how to lift up state.

We should have added a new `div` with a `className` of `cart` and put a `ul` inside of it.

We also want to update our functionality of our `onClick` inside of the `ProductList`, rather than toggle a true/false value, we want to take that item and add it to the `App`'s state and then pass it down to the shopping cart.

Let's make a `ShoppingCart` component. It's going to be very similar to our `ProductList`, as a bonus, you could think about whether there would be a way to reuse our product list or if it makes sense to keep them separate.

```js
class ShoppingCart extends React.Component {
  render () {
    return (
      <li>{this.props.product.name }  {this.props.product.price}</li>
    )
  }
}

```

Now Let's add some state to our `App`. Our cart will start out empty, so it'll just be an empty array

```js
state = {
  products: products,
  name: '',
  price: 0,
  description: 'Describe this item',
  isHiring: true,
  cartItems: []
}
```

Let's make a function that will add to our cart in our `App`

```js
addToCart = (item) => {
  this.setState({cartItems: [item, ...this.state.cartItems]})
}
```

We have to pass this function down to our ProductList

```js
<ul>
  {this.state.products.map(product => {
    return (
      <ProductList product={product} handleAdd={this.addToCart} />
    )
  }
  )}
</ul>
```

To use this in our click event and to pass it back up, we'll have to use it inside another function, since we have to pass an argument.

**ProductList**

```js
render () {
  return (
    <li onClick={() => this.props.handleAdd(this.props.product)}>{this.props.product.name }  {this.props.product.price} {this.state.inShoppingCart ? <span> is in the shopping cart! </span> : ''}</li>
  )
```

Finally, let's add the items in our cart so that they render in our shopping cart

```js
/* ... app.js*/
<div className='cart'>
  <h3> Shopping Cart </h3>
  <ul>
    {this.state.cartItems.map(item => {
      return (
        <ShoppingCart product={item} />
      )
    }
    )}
  </ul>
</div>
```

We are probably starting to notice that our file is getting hard to manage.

Typically, React components are in their own file and are imported and exported accordingly. We would see this if we were using something like `create-react-app`, but since we are just loading them through script tags in the `index.html`

- `mkdir components`
- `touch ShoppingCart.js`
- `touch ProductList.js`

Remember, order of loading matters

**index.html**

```html
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <title>React State Store</title>
  <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/react/16.3.2/umd/react.production.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/react-dom/16.3.2/umd/react-dom.production.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/babel-standalone/6.26.0/babel.min.js"></script>
  <script src="/data.js"></script>
  <script type="text/babel" src="./components/ShoppingCart.js"></script>
  <script type="text/babel" src="./components/ProductList.js"></script>
  <script type="text/babel" src="app.js"></script>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="main.css">
</head>
```


Using React this way is great for learning and small personal projects. However, this is not optimal for production-level builds.

Create React App continues to evolve into a beginner-friendly tool, but it has it's own learning curve in addition to learning React. We will learn to use it in Unit 4. (Or I am happy to show you during lab or office hours)

If you are feeling confident with React, feel free to try the couple labs/assignments with `creat-react-app`. But it's totally fine to use just the links and focus on understanding on React well before adding more complexity.
