# Intro to React Props

## Learning Objectives
 - Learn about props
 - Learn how to pass props
 - Learn difference between props and state


## Props
  Props is short for properties. We know that a component can have state (a view based on data). If we think back to our React Store, we had just one component. It was a pretty small app, so one component was fine. But as we would continue to build out functionality, our one component would get very complex and the code could expand to hundreds or thousands of lines. Maintaining such a large component would be really hard.

  We'd likely start out by wanting a component for our items. Let's continue to build our app. We can either continue what we were working on in the last class or we can use this starter code:

## Set Up

- `mkdir react_store`
- `cd react_store`
- `touch app.js index.html data.js`
- copy paste the code from the appropriate sections from [Setup.md](Setup.md)
- don't forget to run a server to open `index.html` in the browser

## Make a new component
Let's make a new component and copy paste our code for our products inside of it

```js
class ProductList extends React.Component {
  render () {
    return ()
  }
}
```

```js
class ProductList extends React.Component {
  render () {
    return (
      <li>{product.name }  {product.price}</li>
    )
  }
}
```

**App component**

```js
<ul>
{this.state.products.map(product => {
  return (
    <ProductList />
  )
}
</ul>

```

When we load this we get `product is not defined`. This is because our new component doesn't have access to the state of the parent component. We can pass down state to our component with props.


**App component**

```js
<ul>
{this.state.products.map(product => {
  return (
    <ProductList product={product}/>
  )
}
</ul>

```

Now we can access the data we're passing down in the property `product` to `this.props` in our `ProductList` component

**ProductList Component**

```js
class ProductList extends React.Component {
  render () {
    return (
      <li>{this.props.product.name }  {this.props.product.price}</li>
    )
  }
}
```

## A Component that Has Props and State

 Let's say we want to show a user if an item is in their shopping cart. We'll set it up that if a user clicks on an item it will be 'added to their shopping cart' (we don't have a shopping cart feature yet, but we can mimic it for now)


 ```js
 class ProductList extends React.Component {

    state = {
      inShoppingCart: false
    }
   
   render () {
     return (
       <li>{this.props.product.name }  {this.props.product.price}</li>
     )
   }
 }
 ```

 Now we can conditionally render a message whether or not an item is in the shopping cart


```js
      <li>{this.props.product.name }  {this.props.product.price} {this.state.inShoppingCart ? <span> is in the shopping cart! </span> : ''}</li>
```

Let's add a function to allow us to toggle the value

```js
toggleCart = () => {
  this.setState({inShoppingCart : !this.state.inShoppingCart })
}
```


Finally, let's add an `onClick` that will allow us to toggle the value of `inShoppingCart`

```js
render () {
  return (
    <li onClick={this.toggleCart}>{this.props.product.name }  {this.props.product.price} {this.state.inShoppingCart ? <span> is in the shopping cart! </span> : ''}</li>
  )
}
```

Now, we should be able to click on the item and toggle whether or not we see the message that the item is in the shopping cart.
